5-alpha reductase: A chemical that changes the sex hormone testosterone into a substance called dihydrotestosterone. This hormone can cause the prostate gland to grow abnormally.

abdominal muscles: A flat sheet of muscles on the front of the abdomen, between the ribcage and the pelvis.

abdominoplasty: A procedure to remove excess abdominal skin and tighten the underlying stomach muscles. Also known as a tummy tuck.

abduction: Movement of a body part, such as an arm or leg, away from the center of the body.

ablation: A form of treatment that uses electrical energy, heat, cold, alcohol, or other modalities to destroy a small section of damaged tissue.

abrasion: A scraping or rubbing away of the skin or other surface.

abscess: Pus that collects in a pocket of swollen, red tissue. Often occurs on the surface of the skin.

abutment: A tooth or implant to which a fixed prosthesis is anchored.

acceptance-based therapies: Psychotherapy techniques that use mindfulness to help a person recognize and accept thoughts and feelings but not be controlled by them.

accommodation: The eye's ability to focus on objects that are close.

ACE: Abbreviation for angiotensin-converting enzyme, an enzyme that converts the inactive form of the protein angiotensin (angiotensin I) to its active form—angiotensin II.

ACE inhibitor: Abbreviation of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, a drug used to treat high blood pressure and congestive heart failure.

acetabulum: A curved, bowl-shaped depression in the outer part of the hipbone. The ball-shaped portion at the top of the thighbone fits into this space to form the hip joint.

acetaldehyde: The main breakdown product of alcohol metabolism; accumulation of it in the bloodstream may produce flushing (a feeling of heat in the face or chest) and vomiting.

acetaminophen: A common, over-the-counter drug used to reduce fever and relieve mild to moderate pain, but which does not reduce redness or swelling (inflammation).

acetylcholine: A neurotransmitter (a chemical messenger that sends signals between brain cells) that plays roles in attention, learning, and memory.

Achilles' tendon: A band of connective tissue that connects the calf muscle to the heel bone. This tissue is prone to swelling and/or rupture.

achlorhydria: A condition in which the stomach produces little or no acid. This can affect digestion, cause stomach pain, and keep the body from absorbing vitamins and nutrients.

acne: An inflammatory disease resulting from excess sebum production, follicle plugging, and increased bacterial production.

acquired immunodeficiency syndrome: Usually abbreviated as AIDS. This is the most advanced stage of infection with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which can severely weaken the immune system. People with AIDS get many infections, often from diseases that don't affect people with healthy immune systems.

acquisition: The term given to the brain's absorption of new information to begin creating a memory.

acromioclavicular joint: A shoulder joint that connects the clavicle to the scapula.

actin: One of the proteins that allows cells to move and muscles to contract.

actinic keratosis: Scaly pink or red-brown raised spots or patches on the skin caused by overexposure to the sun. Actinic keratosis may be a precursor to skin cancer.

active surveillance: A strategy for managing early prostate cancer in which a man has regular checkups but does not undergo treatment until the disease shows signs of worsening.

acupressure: Using the thumb or fingers to apply pressure to particular spots, or pressure points, on the body in order to relieve pain.

acupuncture: A treatment based on Chinese medicine. Thin needles are inserted into the skin at specific points on the body. This therapy is used to treat pain and various health problems and to reduce stress.

acute: A condition that comes on suddenly, often with severe, but short-lived symptoms.

acute pain: Severe pain that occurs suddenly and usually lasts a short while.

acute urinary retention: A sudden inability to empty the bladder. Causes include an enlarged prostate gland (in men) or bladder muscle problems.

adaptability: The ability of an organism to change genetically in a way that allows it to deal better with its environmental conditions.

adaptive immunity: The ability of the body to learn to fight specific infections after being exposed to the germs that cause them.

addiction: Loss of control over indulging in a substance or performing an action or behavior, and continued craving for it despite negative consequences.

adduction: Movement of a body part toward or across the midline.

adenocarcinoma: A type of cancer that grows in the layer of tissue known as the epithelium. This tissue lines organs and structures in the body, protecting or enclosing them.

adenoma: A benign growth found in the layer of cells that lines certain organs (epithelial cells).

adenosine triphosphate: An energy-storing molecule that is found in all human cells. Usually abbreviated as ATP.

adequate intake: An estimate of the amount of a nutrient needed by healthy people. The Adequate Intake is used when there isn't enough information to set a recommended dietary allowance (RDA).

adhesion: A band of scar-like tissue that forms between two surfaces inside the body, connecting tissues or organs which are not normally connected.

adipose tissue: Fat-filled tissue.

adjuvant therapy: Extra therapy given after a primary treatment, to increase the effectiveness of the primary treatment. For example, using chemotherapy after surgery or radiation treatment for cancer.

adrenal glands: Glands that sit on top of each kidney and secrete stress hormones.

adrenaline: Stress hormone that puts the body on high alert. Changes include faster heartbeat, more rapid breathing, greater energy, and higher blood pressure. Also called epinephrine.

adult day services: Centers providing daytime services to adults who need supervision, social support, or assistance with daily activities.

adulterant: An ingredient in a medicinal product (herb, supplement, or prescription drug), which dilutes the purity of the product and does not contribute to its therapeutic effects.

advance care directive (or advance medical directive): A legal document that describes the kind of medical care a person want if an accident or illness leaves him or her unable to make or communicate decisions.

advanced sleep phase syndrome: A pattern of falling asleep and waking up earlier than wanted that worsens progressively over time.
